= TkXML

*ARCHIVED -- HISTORICAL ARTIFACT*

TkXML is the *oldest piece of publicly redistributed Ruby code* its
author ever wrote. The original version dates to April 2002 -- the year
he learned the Ruby language -- and a copy of that original alpha
release is preserved in this repository under +work/tkxml.rb+, complete
with the original +runbox.com+ contact email.

The library is a small experiment in defining graphical user interfaces
declaratively in XML, building Ruby/Tk widgets from an XML document in
a one-to-one correspondence with the Ruby/Tk API. It was inspired by
GTK's Glade format. At the time, the idea of "UI as data" was novel and
exciting; it would be another decade before declarative-UI ideas (React,
SwiftUI, Compose, Flutter, etc.) became dominant in mainstream software,
though those wisely chose code-as-data rather than literal XML markup.

Both this library and its target are now historical:

* *Tk* itself was removed from Ruby's standard library in Ruby 3.0, and
  the +tk+ gem is essentially unmaintained. Few modern Ruby projects use
  Tk for new GUI work.
* *XML-based UI definitions* in general lost out to declarative code,
  JSON-based formats, and language-native DSLs.

What remains interesting about this code is its *age*. It is a small
piece of one Ruby programmer's first year with the language, preserved
intact. No further development is planned.

----


== DESCRIPTION

An XML markup language for generating Tk user-interfaces. It was inspired
by GTK's glade format. The TkXML format defines a very simple one-to-one
correlation to the Ruby Tk API.


== SYNOPSIS

Here's an +example.xml+ TkXML file:

  <Tk:Root name="test" title="Test">
    <Tk:Frame name="menuframe">
      <Tk:Menubutton name="filebutton" text="File" underline="0">
        <Tk:Menu name="filemenu" tearoff="false">
          <Tk:_add _1="command" label="Open" underline="0" accel="Ctrl+O" command="openDocument" />
          <Tk:_add _1="command" label="Exit" underline="0" accel="Ctrl+Q" command="exitApplication" />
        </Tk:Menu>
        <Tk:_pack side="left" />
      </Tk:Menubutton>
      <Tk:_pack side="left" />
    </Tk:Frame>
    <Tk:_bind _1="Control-o" _2="openDocument" />
    <Tk:_bind _1="Control-q" _2="exitApplication" />
  </Tk:Root>

To use the library:

  require 'tkxml'

  tkxml = TkXML.new(File.read('example.xml'))
  tkxml.build


== STATUS

At this point, TkXML is little more than an interesting experiment in encoding 
GUIs via markup. But it may well have the potential of becoming a productive
tool if someone were inclined to further it's development.


== HISTORY

An interesting side note. TkXML is the oldest bit of redistributed Ruby code
your humble author had ever writ.


== COPYRIGHTS

Copyright (c) 2002 Rubyworks

TkXML is distributable in accordance with the *BSD-2-Clause* license.

See NOTICE.rdoc for details.

